RETHINKING WHAT A RESUME
IS
Yeah, I think I know what you want. You want me to get right to it. Tell you how to
write a winning resume, give you an outline or template, tell you how to fill it in, tell
you where to post it. And that’s that.
Well, much as I would love to do that, I just can’t.
Resumes need a lot more thought these days. Since the Great Recession of 2008,
resumes aren’t working too well.
I’m guessing you knew that.
Everyone assumes this is because there are no jobs these days.
Well, there are jobs. I’m looking at the government’s little-known report, sitting here
on my desk right now. It’s called JOLTS for short, but its full name is Job Openings
and Labor Turnover Survey. You can look it up on the Internet. It’s issued monthly.
This one is for January 2014. It reports that during that month, 4,500,000 people in the
United States found jobs, and there were still 4,000,000 vacancies unfilled at the end
of that month. That’s a total of 8,500,000 vacancies filled or waiting to be filled. That
month! That’s pretty typical in the United States. Every month.
Now admittedly, that’s not enough jobs or enough vacancies to fix our distressing
unemployment problem. Still, somebody’s getting those eight million jobs. Each
month.
Why shouldn’t you be among them?Well, one reason—a big reason—may be your resume.
It almost certainly needs fixin’.
Yesterday’s resumes just aren’t up to the task today.
Yesterday’s resumes are like a dull knife trying to cut food. Need sharpening. Badly.
These days, you can’t just fill out a resume, post it, and expect it to go anywhere.
Resumes now take more time than they used to.
They take more thought than they used to.
In this economic climate, you have to work harder to make yours effective, in finding
those jobs that are out there.
But you can do it. Yes, you can.
That’s what this little book is about.
Let’s start simple, with some thinking. Or, rethinking.
LET’S START SIMPLE
Okay, here’s the story:
You want to find work. To find it, you’ve got to secure an interview with some
employer or employers who actually have the power to hire you. And employers are
busy people. They’re not necessarily anxious to spend all day doing interviews. So,
since you know that, you send someone on ahead of you, to plead your case for you.
And that someone is not actually a person but a piece of paper.
Yes, you send a piece of paper on ahead of you, to make the case as to why you should
be invited in for an interview. And that piece of paper has a name. It is called a
resume. Or resumé. Or résumé. Or its near cousin, CV (curriculum vitae, meaning
“the course of my life”).
Now, the most interesting thing about this piece of paper (digital or real) is that while
it looks like just a bunch of words, it really is a painting. And that’s because
employers have the same thing you do: imagination.
Yes, your resume looks like just words. A lot of words. But when they’re reading yourresume, the words are lifting off the page and painting a picture of you in the
imagination of the employer who reads it.
Employers wouldn’t call it a painting; they would call it an “impression” of you. Same
thing. They are looking at this piece of paper, covered with words, but they are
thinking in terms of pictures. They are visualizing you.
Now, here’s the question. Do the words they read make them visualize you as a
competent worker, or not? Do the words they read make them visualize you as
energetic, or not? As joyful, or not? As a team player, or not? As honest, or not?
And let’s throw in: Do they visualize you as tall, short, or average height? Young,
middle-aged, or old? Yes, those things aren’t covered in your resume, but employers
can’t turn their imaginations off, just because they’ve finished looking at this piece of
paper you sent on ahead of you. Rightly or wrongly, they see, they imagine, beyond
your words. That’s just human nature.
But to my main point: It’s not just words that determine whether or not they decide to
call you in for an interview. It’s the picture of you that these words paint in an
employer’s imagination that determines whether they invite you in, or not.
So, when you set out to compose your resume, you would do well to think of yourself
overall as a painter, not a writer. Your paintbrushes are your words. What is the
picture of you that they paint? That is the question you should ask yourself, when you
—or someone you hire—are debating what words to set down in your resume.
EIGHT SECONDS
Let’s say you see a job posting. Some employer is looking for someone to fill a
vacancy or a job newly created. You send in your resume. And you want to know how
long an employer will likely spend looking at this resume/painting of you that you are
sending on ahead, to plead your case for you. The answer will vary, of course.
There’s a difference, for example, between how long the owner of a restaurant will
spend looking at the resume you drop off, when you are applying to become the
manager there, versus how long a multibillion-dollar corporation will spend looking
at your resume when 250 came in that day. With a small employer you might get as
much as two minutes. With larger employers, we know (because people have
measured it) that generally your resume will get between four and fifteen seconds ofattention. The average is eight.
Eight seconds! Yikes! An employer is going to be reading down your resume fast. In
fact, they may not get all the way to the bottom in those eight seconds. So, what they
read first, what they see in the top half or even top third of your resume, is going to be
determinative.
What can you do about that?
What can you do about this painting that the employers may be taking only a fast look
at?
Well, real painters of course paint in various ways. But, as we can tell from the
sketchbooks of famous painters like Rembrandt (below1), they usually begin by laying
down in broad strokes the outline of the whole portrait or picture. Then later they fill
in. Details, shading, and such.
If your resume is only going to get eight seconds of attention, then it must do something
like that. In the top third of your resume you must lay down in broad strokes an outline
of who you are, using the words you write. Enough to make the employer hungry to see
what else you have to say for yourself, as during the remaining two-thirds you shade
and fill in. So to speak.
KEY WORDS OR KEYWORDS
The new wrinkle of our day and age, regarding resumes, is key words. In the old days
—ten or twenty years ago, say—you never heard about these. But now, article after
article on the Internet will emphasize the importance of your putting key words near
the top of your resume. Everyone thinks it’s because of computers and scanningsoftware. And that’s a great part of it, sure.
But not solely. Eventually the eyes of a real human are going to be looking at your
resume. Key words, like all the other words on your resume, are paintbrushes. But it is
the peculiar task of key words to lay down, in bold strokes, near the very top of your
painting—excuse me, resume—the broad outline of who you are, which the rest of
your resume is then going to fill in. If the employer’s eyes get down that far.
Now, this term is normally spelled keywords. But the dictionary permits the term to be
spelled as two separate words, and throughout this guide I spell it as two separate
words.
Why? Because in my working with job-hunters I have discovered that altogether too
many of them think keywords are a separate animal, with an official list from which
you choose, and that sort of thing. No, they are just words—any words—that are key
to understanding the job under discussion, and what you have to offer. Most any word,
noun or verb, may become key to understanding a job … or You.
And you want those key words near the top of your resume.
Here’s one example, starting on next page.